>> THEYYAM
 Theyyam is the concept of divinity for the people of North Malabar goes beyond a distant power or force residing in the temple sanctum. It is a power that descends among the people, directly listens to their sorrows, and continuously protects the land and its inhabitants. For them, God (Daivam) means Theyyam.  And the dance of the Theyyam is more than just a folk artform. It is a cultural symbol of North Malabar and one of the ancient artistic traditions that continually proclaims the pride and grandeur of North Malabar. When the Theyyam embodies the divine energy and performs its ritualistic dance, it is venerated by people of all castes. In that space, there is no power beyond the Theyyam, be it for a Brahmin, Nambiar, Thiyya, Malayan, Pulayan, or Vannan (various castes of North Kerala). The Theyyam is not only a worship tradition but also an important cultural heritage and inseparable part of village life.

>> Tradition a and Significance
 The Theyyam is predominantly performed in North Malabar, including the Kannur district, areas of Kasargod, Wayanad, and the northern regions of the Kozhikode district, as well as some areas of Karnataka state. The primary traditional performers of the Theyyam are from the Malayan and Vannan communities, which are categorized as Scheduled Castes. Although performers also come from other minor communities, these two are considered the chief performers.

 Most families and communities in North Malabar have their family deity as a Theyyam. Each village also has a Theyyam as their village god. The Theyyam is performed in houses and temples, either as an annual festival or as a special offering to the deity on particular occasions. There are nearly 400 different Theyyams, categorised as major and minor ones. These performances primarily honour major goddesses and gods, tree gods, mountain gods, warriors, soldiers, and sub-deities such as forest gods (Vana Murtis) and hunting gods (Nayattu Devatha). There are also performances for minor characters such as Pottan (deaf and dumb) and Muthala (crocodile). Some of the major Theyyams include Muchilottu Bhagavathy (representing Goddess Kali), Kathivannur Veeran, Uchila, Karim Chamundi, and Muthappan. Alongside Hindu deities and characters, the Theyyam also incorporates various Muslim characters like Bappiriyan Theyyam, Ummachi Theyyam and Aalibhootham which shows the inter cultural acceptance and development of the art-form, as it transcends religious differences.

 the Theyyam season starts from the tenth day of the Malayalam month of Thulaam (usually mid-October) and lasts until the middle of Edavam month (typically late May).

>> Performance 
 The Theyyam is performed as a ritual, and the performers undergo strict and intense preparation known as Vrutham, which includes fasting, daily rituals, prayers, meditation and a specially disciplined lifestyle. The performer holds a highly respected position among the village members, gaining status through seniority, performance skills and dedication. The costumes are significant, varying in style, complexity and component parts, according to the characters and their power. The headgear, known as Mudi, is the most crucial attribute of the Theyyam. Face masks, wooden breastplates (Marmula), breasts made of dry coconut shells, amulets, bangles, anklets, and other ornaments are used differently for each character. Theyyam skirts or waist dresses are crafted from coconut fronds, areca leaves and bamboo slivers. The skirt for Kathivanur Veeran Theyyam is made from bamboo pieces wrapped in red cloth. The skirts for Theechamundi Theyyam, Pottan Theyyam and Uchitta Theyyam are fashioned from coconut fronds.  Certain Theyyams however wear only a simple mundu (a long piece of unstitched cloth covering the waist and legs). The ornaments worn by the Theyyam vary depending on the character. For Bhagavathy Theyyam, a long silver teeth ornament called 'ekir' is worn. Both male and female performers wear bangles known as 'Katakam' and 'Chutakam,' along with amulets and small ankle bracelets. Certain Theyyams representing Bhagavathis wear a silver crown adorned with small serpent heads topped with red flowers, and some also wear a large, intricately carved golden collar. Face make-up also varies with characters. The face painting is done with natural colours such as rice flour, turmeric and charcoal. Red, symbolizing energy, power and anger, is the predominant colour in Theyyam make-up, traditionally made by mixing turmeric and limestone. Extensive fireworks, fire torches attached to the Mudi, and dancing in burning embers are common practices for certain Theyyam characters.

 Kaliyattam is the term used for grand Theyyam performances arranged in temples or by prominent families. In some temples, the Theyyam festival is conducted at intervals of 12 or more years, known as Perumkaliyattam. The Theyyam is a synthesis of ritualistic dance, instrumental music, dance, painting, sculpture and literature, embodying the rich cultural heritage of North Malabar, which is still highly accepted and protected by the local community. The Theyyam has gained recognition as an important part of the intangible heritage of Kerala.